Firewalls


A firewall is a network security device that monitors incoming and outgoing network traffic and decides whether to allow or block specific traffic based on a defined set of security rules.

Firewalls have been a first line of defense in network security for over 25 years. They establish a barrier between secured and controlled internal networks that can be trusted and untrusted outside networks, such as the Internet. 

A firewall can be hardware, software, software-as-a service (SaaS), public cloud, or private cloud (virtual).

A firewall is a network security device that monitors and controls incoming and outgoing traffic from a computer network. By allowing only authorized traffic and blocking unwanted traffic, firewalls protect against unauthorized access, malware and other security threats.
Firewalls can also prevent sensitive data from leaving the network.

What Are the 3 Types of Firewalls?
Network Firewalls — including static network firewalls, stateful firewalls and next-generation firewalls (NGFW)
Host-Based Firewalls
Web Application Firewalls

How Does a Firewall Work?
A firewall inspects incoming and outgoing network traffic, and makes decisions based on the ruleset. The data sent over a computer network is assembled into a packet, which contains the sender and recipient’s IP addresses and port numbers. Before a packet is delivered to its destination, it’s sent to the firewall for inspection. If the firewall determines the packet is permitted, it will send it to the destination; otherwise, the firewall will drop the packet.
The criteria the firewall uses to determine whether or not the packet is permitted is called a ruleset. For example, a firewall rule may say to drop all traffic incoming to port 22, which is commonly used to log in to computers remotely using SSH (secure shell). In this case, when a packet arrives with the destination port of 22, the firewall will ignore it and fail to deliver it to the source IP.


Advantages of a Firewall
Firewalls create a layer of protection against unauthorized access to your network.
Firewalls help organizations manage their bandwidth usage.
Firewalls help you monitor your network traffic so you can identify and respond to threats quickly.
Firewalls prevent viruses and malware from infecting systems and spreading throughout the network.
